# STA325-ML-Project-Spotify

ABSTRACT: 

Through this project, we are addressing the problem of Hit Song Science which concerns the possibility of predicting whether a song will be a hit, using machine learning algorithms and statistical techniques. We collated a dataset of approximately 4,000 hit and non-hit songs and extracted each song's audio features from the SpotifyWeb API. Using four machine-learning algorithms, we predicted the Billboard success of a song with approximately 75% accuracy using a Neural Network with one hidden layer, which was our most successful model. The result can be especially useful to artists, record labels, and music vendors as popular songs generate greater revenues and allow musicians to share their art with a vast audience. For instance, a record label could focus on investing on the potential hit songs in order to raise revenue. 

INTRODUCTION
Music information  retrieval (MIR) is the interdisciplinary science of retrieving information from music. MIR is a small but growing field of research with many real-world applications. Hit Song Science (HSS) is one of the well-known problems within the scope of MIR. This term was coined by Mike McCready, a pioneer in the field of analyzing the underlying mathematical patterns in music. Understanding the audio features of hit songs is of importance and relevance to a vast array of people ranging from musicians, data scientists, record label owners, streaming platforms, to mere music enthusiasts. 
There exist extensive studies conducted in this field, such as an interactive New York Times article from 2018 that used Spotify audio features to express the similarity of seasonal songs. Today, musical companies are employing advanced and cutting-edge ML techniques to study audio features and provide consultancy services to record labels and artists. In the past, many researchers used K-Means Clustering to predict hits, which focussed more on signal-processing that hit prediction. While other studies in this field focussed on classifying song lyrics to predict hits, this approach results in prevalent false positives. 
One of the most objective and definitive ways of measuring a track’s popularity is through its Billboard Hot 100 Chart rankings. The goal of our project is to predict a binary outcome of whether a song will become a Billboard Hot 100 hit or not based on its audio features, using four machine learning techniques. The methodology of each technique is described in the next section. 
Our research is relevant to musicians and music labels. Not only will it help determine how best to produce songs to maximize their potential for becoming a hit, it could also help decide which songs could give the greatest return for investment on advertising and publicity. Furthermore, it would help artists and music labels determine which songs are unlikely to become Billboard Hot 100 hits. 


